[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So the first
thing I promised to do today
was to do the last problem on
the first problem set with you
all.
And so for context, this was
a pretty difficult problem
and a lot of people
didn't get it fully right
or made a mistake.
And actually, even the
people who did get it right,
they tended to write
something that was
pretty long and complicated.
So I spent a while
thinking about it.
I think I could have
set up the problem
with a little more direction.
But anyway.
But I will explain
it to everybody
and try to say what
were the issues
and what do you need to
know to do it cleanly.
OK.
So the background
of this problem
is that we had done
a bunch of stuff
in class about lines in
the plane, say, an Fq2.
And the problem was to try to
do something similar for lines
in Fq3, but it is a
little more complicated.
So let me first remind everybody
what we did for lines in Fq2,
and then we'll go up
to three dimensions.
OK.
So general setup.
So first of all, if we have
a function on Fqd, then f0
will be the constant part.
So f0 of x is 1 over q to the d
sum y in Fq to the d of f of y.
And then f sub h f high
will be the rest of it.
So f is f0 plus 1.
Oh.
So first we studied
lines in Fq2.
And this is just going to be a
recap of what we did in class.
So we noticed.
So let's say that L1
and L2 are our lines
or characteristic
function of lines.
OK, so there are two cases.
If L1 and L2 are
parallel, then you
can easily see that their
inner product is zero.
Parallel means they
don't intersect.
So you get this.
OK.
And you could also
look at the high part.
And if you look at the high
part, it will be negative.
The inner product will
be negative L1 h2h will
be negative.
It's easy to compute.
There's something I
could say out loud.
One always has that fg
is f0 g0 plus f high g.
You can see that from the
Fourier representation
of these things.
So in this case, the inner
product of L1 and L2 is 0.
L1 0 and L2 0 are both
positive so their inner product
is positive.
So for this all to fit
together, this inner product
should be negative.
So that's what happens
if they're parallel.
Now at the time, parallel
felt a special case.
Two lines are
usually not parallel.
Once in a while
they're parallel.
So maybe the more important
case is if they're not parallel.
L1 and L2 are not parallel.
So if they're not parallel,
then they intersect.
And therefore, the sum
L1 of x, L2 of x is 1.
But if you take the high
part, L1h, L2h, you get 0.
So the high parts
are orthogonal.
OK.
And we discussed a couple
of ways of seeing this.
So one way to see it is based
on the Fourier transform.
So if you take L
hat of ksi, its norm
is q times characteristic
function of L perp.
And so in particular,
the support
of L1 hat intersected
with the support of L2 hat
is L1 perp intersected
with L2 perp, which
is just the origin if the lines
are in different directions.
This is all under L1
and L2 are not parallel.
L1 and L2 are not
parallel, L1 and L2
hat also are not parallel,
and they intersect only
at the origin.
And then by looking at the high
part, we leave out the origin.
So there's nothing left
where they intersect.
And that gives us
the orthogonal.
OK.
So once we had this, we used
it to prove a proposition.
That said, if f is the sum
over some set of lines of L,
then f high L2
squared is bounded
by the sum over the lines of
L high or not high L2 squared,
which then you could
work out easily
as bounded by the
number of lines times q.
This is almost an equality.
OK.
So this was really
the key thing.
And this came from
orthogonality.
You can think of it as taking
this sum and expanding it out.
So this is the sum
L1 and L2 in our set
of lines of the sum L1h L2h.
And for each of these,
we plugged in that.
OK.
So now let's go to three
dimensions, see what's the same
and what's different,
and most importantly,
what should be the analog
of this proposition.
OK.
So lines in Fq3.
So they could still be
parallel or not parallel.
So if L1 and L2 are parallel,
then everything is still true.
They're parallel,
then this is 0.
And if we wanted to take the
high part, it would be negative.
Just the same as before.
OK.
What if they're not parallel?
If they're not parallel, there
are still two possibilities.
They could intersect each
other or they could not
intersect each other.
So I guess there's subcases.
If they intersect, then
the sum on X L1, L2
would be 1,
intersecting one point.
That looks like before.
And then we could
take the high part.
But the high part isn't 0.
So this is an important
thing that's different.
So one common mistake was not
to do this computation carefully
and just assume it should be 0
like it was in two dimensions.
But it's not.
There's not that much difference
between 1 and 1 minus 1 over q,
so it's not clear that we're
accomplishing a whole lot
by focusing on the high part.
Yeah?
OK.
So to see this, we could
do this computation.
It's elementary but it's
a little bit tedious.
But let me see if I can
say something conceptual.
So the reason that
this happened here
is that the two high parts
are independent of each other
as functions.
That's a high brow way of
saying what's going on.
And that's not true anymore.
If you have two lines that
intersect in three space,
it's not independent
of each other.
So if you know that
you're in the first line,
then you're much more likely
to be in the second line
than if you were
just a random point.
OK.
I don't know if that's helpful,
but you could also just check
that that's how it goes.
They could also not intersect.
If they don't intersect
then everything is the same
as the parallel case actually.
So that's going to be 0.
And the sum of the high
parts, the inner product
of the high parts
will be negative.
If you do it carefully,
it's negative 1 over q.
Same thing would be true here.
OK.
So another direction that
this suggested to some people
is that we ought to try to
think how many pairs of lines
intersect, as opposed
to the pairs of lines
that don't intersect.
That is a totally
reasonable way of thinking
about this from the beginning.
But it's not obvious
how to figure that out.
It is possible for every
pair of lines to intersect.
There are two significant
ways that could happen.
One way is you could take all
the lines through the origin.
Just pick a point and take all
the lines through that point.
Then every pair of lines
will intersect at that point,
have a porcupine shape.
The second way that almost
all the lines could intersect
is to choose them
all in a plane.
So if you fix a plane and then
you choose lines in the plane,
a few of them might be parallel,
but almost every pair of lines
in the plane will intersect.
Anyway, so people tried to
explore this a little bit,
but it's not so clear how
to put a bound about how
many pairs will intersect
OK.
So then another thought is that
instead of focusing on this,
we should focus--
we should look at
the Fourier transform
and just see what the
Fourier transform tells us.
So the Fourier transform
does have a nice description
in any dimension, like you did
on the first part of the problem
set.
And it tells us something.
So let's think about
the Fourier transform.
The Fourier point of view.
OK.
So if we take the Fourier
transform of our line
and look at its
absolute value, it
will be q times the
characteristic function
of L perp.
But notice, so the
L is still a line.
But since we're in
three dimensions,
L perp is two dimensional.
OK.
So then if we were to look at
the-- so if L1 and L2 are not
parallel.
Not parallel.
If I look at the support
of L1 hat intersected
with the support of
L2 hat, well, that's
L1 perp intersected
with L2 perp.
So I have a two plane
and I'm intersecting it
with a different two plane.
And that will make a line.
That's a line.
OK.
So a third common mistake was
to not do this so carefully
and think that this
intersection was just zero.
And if the intersection was just
0, when you take the high part,
you would get rid
of the 0 and that
would show that L1 and
L2 were orthogonal,
which is not actually--
L1 and L2 hat orthogonal,
which is not actually the case.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
So to prove some
kind of an estimate
about how these lines
intersect, we're
going to try to combine
this information
and this information.
So if they're
parallel, they actually
are orthogonal,
which is very good.
If they're not parallel,
they're not fully orthogonal.
But the Fourier transform of--
the intersection of
Fourier transforms
is kind of small and special.
We'll try to use that.
OK.
So here's the
analogous proposition.
And I think it would
have been helpful
if I had stated this
in the problem set.
So here's how it goes.
So if L is a set of lines
in three dimensions in Fq3
and f is the sum of
these lines, then
f L2 squared is bounded by--
so what we had before was
something like orthogonality.
Some L and L of fL or-- and
this is with the high part.
The high part L2 squared.
And that's not true anymore.
But it is true if we put
an extra factor of q.
OK.
And so then that is
around the number of lines
times each one of
these is around q,
and there's another factor
of q which is around there.
OK.
So if you compare
these, this is like
an orthogonality proposition.
This is clearly much
weaker than orthogonality
because we have a
big factor here.
Nevertheless, it's
stronger than nothing.
Even though there's
a big factor here,
this proposition has some
meaningful information in it.
OK.
So let me explain how to
prove this proposition,
and then we'll
digest it and argue
that it does tell us
something interesting,
even though it's a lot
weaker, in some sense,
than the two
dimensional proposition.
OK.
So how do we prove this?
All right.
So for parallel lines, we
have really good information.
So let's first think about all
the lines in a given direction
and add those up.
And then after that, we'll add
up the different directions.
So we'll label the
directions by w.
So w will be a one dimensional
subspace direction.
And then Lw will be the
lines in our set of lines
that are parallel to w.
And we can also make an fw.
That's the sum over
the lines in Lw of L.
So f itself is the sum of the
different directions of fw.
So the first thing that we'll
do is prove some estimates
about fw.
And this part really
is not that difficult.
We're adding up functions
with disjoint supports.
It's not that
complicated, what happens.
OK.
So fw L2 squared
is the size of w.
Sorry.
The size of Lw times q.
Why is that?
Because the-- so proof.
So sum fw squared is the sum L
and Lw sum on x L of x squared.
But these lines are parallel.
They're disjoint
from each other.
So there's only-- at any
given x, only one of them
is making an appearance.
So this is sum L and L
sum on x out of x squared.
And then that's the
right-hand side.
It's not clear yet
why we would want
to look at the high frequency
part, but if we did,
it wouldn't change much.
So fw high, L2 squared is
less than fw L2 squared.
And so the proof is that this
is true for any function.
We have it over there.
For any function gL2 squared
is always g0 L2 squared plus g
high L2 squared.
So it's at least as big
as g high L2 squared.
OK.
You can do it with
Fourier transform.
You could also do it by hand.
Let's call it an exercise.
OK.
Now, the more tricky
and interesting point
is what happens when we add
together the different w.
And when we do that, the way
their Fourier transforms behave
will come into play.
All right.
So I guess that
this is lemma three.
But I'm going to put
a star because this
is the important lemma.
This is where the interesting
stuff is happening.
OK.
Important lemma says
that fL2 squared
is bounded by q plus 1 times
the sum on w of fw L2 squared.
OK.
Here's the proof.
Oh, I'm sorry.
And now I need to
put high everywhere.
All right.
So f high L2 squared
is, by Plancherel,
it's the sum on the nonzero
ksi f hat of ksi squared.
So remember that f0 is the
zero frequency part of f.
f high is all the
other frequencies in f.
And so this is Plancherel.
Oh, OK.
And I guess because of the
finite field normalization
that I always have
trouble remembering,
there should be this.
OK.
Now, f is the sum of fw.
This is 1 over q cubed times
the sum and the nonzero ksi,
sum on w of fw hat
of ksi squared.
OK.
Now, in two dimensions,
we could have done this
and gotten to this point.
And then we would have been very
happy because the different fw
hats have different supports.
They're supported on different
lines through the origin.
So we would have orthogonality.
The way it would have
worked in two dimensions
is that for any
particular ksi, there
is only one w which
is nonzero in the sum.
And so we could take
the square inside.
OK.
But that's not true anymore.
So fw hat is
supported on w perp,
and in any given
direction, any given ksi,
there are many different two
planes that contain that ksi.
So let's write that down.
So we're going to note that the
support of fw hat is w perp.
And so for any ksi, the fw--
the set of w so that f
hat w of ksi is nonzero
is contained in the set of
w so that w is in ksi perp.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: We still need
the high part, right?
On the f hat.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is--
I think the question is--
so on the left-hand side,
I put the high part of f.
And the question is, do we
need the high part here?
Is that the question?
AUDIENCE: Just the zero.
Not that one.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
we don't need that,
but I should have
said it clearer.
So let's all remember that if
you take the high part of f hat
ksi, what you get is f hat
of ksi if ksi is nonzero
and zero if ksi is zero.
This is f high hat.
OK.
So for any given
frequency ksi, I only
need to include the
w's in ksi perp.
So actually, I can write this.
And there aren't as many.
There's more than one of them.
But there is a
non-trivial bound how many
are terms are in this sum.
So the number of w in ksi perp.
So this is a two plane.
We're talking about how many
lines through the origin
there are in this two plane.
That's q plus 1.
So there are something like q
squared different w in total.
But for any given ksi, we're
only including q of them
in the sum here.
That's not as good
as orthogonality
but it actually is
helpful information.
And the way we can
exploit that information
is by Cauchy-Schwarzing this.
So I'm going to think of this as
the sum of this thing times 1.
Of course I didn't
change anything.
And now I can apply
Cauchy-Schwarz.
1 over q cubed sum
over the nonzero ksi.
The first term will be sum
w in ksi perp f hat of w
of ksi norm squared.
And the second half will be sum
w and ksi perp of 1 squared.
OK.
And this is q plus 1.
So we bring that
out to the front,
and after that,
what we have left
is a sum that just involves
each fw one at a time.
So it's q plus 1, 1 over q
cubed sum on the nonzero ksi.
Actually, I could put-- well,
I'll put the sum on w here.
fw hat of ksi squared.
But I can switch the
order of these sums.
And now if I
Plancherel back, I have
q plus 1 times the sum
on w fw high L2 squared.
And that's the statement.
OK.
Any questions or comments?
In that case, maybe I
have a question for you.
In this proof what was
the purpose of taking out
the 0 frequency?
What did we gain by doing that?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: The zero
frequency is equal to 0
every plane contains
ksi equal to 0.
So the output would
be [INAUDIBLE].
LAWRENCE GUTH: Good.
Good.
So the comment is that ksi
equals 0 is special because--
and when ksi is 0, every
w perp goes through 0.
So there are q squared different
w's, and every one of them
has a contribution at 0.
So if we wanted to
do Cauchy-Schwarz,
we would have q
squared terms here.
But at every other ksi, we have
only q w perps going through it.
And so we have to
pay only q over here.
That's what's different
about 0 and not 0.
Good.
OK.
So now the proof of the
proposition over there
is just assembling these lemmas.
So the proposition
says that I want
to bound the L2 norm of f high.
How do I do it?
Lemma three says the
L2 norm of f high
is bounded by q plus 1
times the sum on w of those,
and lemmas one and
lemmas two tells me
how big each one of these is.
If you put that all together,
you get proposition two.
OK.
Great.
So now let me erase
this a little bit
and let's think about what
proposition two tells us
about lines in three space.
OK.
So actually, let's first review
what proposition one tells us
about lines in the plane.
So f is a sum of lines.
f0 is always the number
of lines divided by q,
and so f0 L2 squared
works out to be
the number of lines squared.
It's not hard to check.
And proposition one, it tells
us that f high L2 squared
is bounded by the
number of lines times q.
So if you put
these together, you
see that if the number of
lines is much bigger than q,
then f is mostly constant.
So then L2 norm of f
high is much smaller
than the L2 norm of
the constant part.
The sum of lines
looks almost constant
with some small perturbations.
OK.
What's the analog of
that in three dimensions?
Lines in Fq3.
OK.
So in three dimensions,
f0 is the number
of lines over q squared because
each line occupies a 1 over q
squared fraction of space.
And so then you can compute
the L2 norm of f0 squared.
It's not difficult. It's
number of lines squared over q.
And on the other
hand, we know that f
high L2 squared is at most the
number of lines times q squared.
So you can put these together.
If the number of
lines is large enough,
then this is way
bigger than this.
If you do a little
bit of algebra,
you see that if
the number of lines
is much larger than q cubed,
then the high frequency part
is much smaller than
the constant part.
So if you add up more
than q cubed lines
in three dimensional
space, you'll
get something that's
mostly constant
with some small perturbations.
OK.
Now these are both the correct
thresholds for this behavior.
Why?
So in two dimensions suppose
I add up less than q lines,
say q over two lines.
Well, they only
fill half of space.
So there's no way that thing
is going to look constant.
So this will certainly not be
true with q over two lines.
All right.
Now in three dimensions
suppose I add up
less than q cubed lines,
maybe half of q cubed lines.
All right.
Now this is a trickier wicket.
It depends which lines I pick.
If you were to pick
half of q cubed lines
randomly and add
them up, it would
be quite close to constant.
But if you pick
them cleverly, you
can make it not look
like a constant.
And here's how to do it.
So example of 1/2 q
cubed lines in Fq cubed.
OK.
Here's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to pick 1/2 q
affine two planes Capital Pj.
And then in each
capital Pj, I pick
all the lines, which is
basically q squared lines.
So a two dimensional plane
has about q squared, q
squared plus q.
So you put this all
together, that's about half
of q cubed lines.
Now f, which is
the sum of L and L,
is supported on the
union of the Pj.
And the size of the Union of
the Pj is clearly at most half
of the space.
So the size of the union
of Pj is at most 1/2 q,
the number of j times q squared
number of points per plane 1/2 q
cubed.
So this thing is only supported
on about half of space.
There's no way that it's
approximately constant.
Cool.
OK.
So in a certain sense, this
is the right threshold,
although you could also
imagine asking some more
refined questions.
Cool.
OK.
I guess looking back
at the homework,
I mentioned a few things that
people tried that didn't work.
And I think the
most common thing
that people had a
tricky time finding
was that they should first group
the lines by their direction
and have these fw's, and
then group the fw's together
to make f.
Yeah.
So I think I could have done
a better job giving direction
to look that way, look
in that direction.
But in hindsight, why
was that a good idea?
There's a saying that I like
about trying to learn stuff,
or trying to figure stuff out
that I learned from a Tai Chi
teacher.
They said, do what's easy first.
So if you are you trying
to, in math, for example,
add up a whole lot of
things and understand
what the sum is like, if there
are some pieces that you can add
up and you know
what those are like,
it's usually a good
idea to do that first.
And adding up parallel lines
is fairly easy to understand,
and so it won't always help.
But sometimes it's helpful
to do what's easy first.
Actually, same thing
happens in Fubini
when I teach analysis
at various levels.
When is it a good
idea to do Fubini
to switch the order
of integration
or switch the
order of summation?
You want to put the sum that
you do first to be the easy one.
That's almost always the
right way to organize it.
OK.
So that was the recap
of the homework.
OK.
Cool.
Now we come to the main
topic of the day, which
is doing some projection
theory in Euclidean space
and thinking about
how projections
makes functions smoother.
So if you take a
function in R to the D
and you project it onto
something lower dimensional,
well, if you just pick one
lower dimensional projection,
it might not be very nice.
But if you look at all the
lower dimensional projections,
most of them will be smoother.
And we're going to
investigate that phenomenon.
And I hope you'll see that it's
very parallel to the large sieve
theory from number theory.
All right.
Projections and smoothing.
So here's our setup.
So f is now a function
on R to the D.
And v is going to be a subspace.
And recall, by the
projection of f, what I mean
is the integral over V perp f of
y plus z d volume v perp of ksi.
So this is a map from functions
on R to the D to functions on v.
OK.
And I'm going to mostly focus--
everything works for
all the dimensions,
but for ease of
notation, whatever,
I'm going to mostly
focus on projecting
to one dimensional subspaces.
So if theta is a direction
in the circle pi theta
of f is going to mean pi--
abbreviation for pi
span of theta of f.
Direction.
Look at the line
in that direction.
All right.
So here's a theorem
that says that if you
start with a function, there's
very little regularity.
Most of the projections
are even smooth.
So theorem says if f is an
L2 function on R to the D,
and the support of f
is in the unit ball,
then if I integrate
over this sphere
and I take the projection
onto the line in the theta
direction of f and I take
it CK norm, then that
is bounded by the L2 norm of f,
provided that the dimension is
big enough.
So I add the hypothesis
at the dimension,
which would be dimension D minus
1 over 2 should be bigger than
1/2 plus k.
You can unwind
that a little bit.
It says D is bigger
than something.
So for example, D is 7.
Then you can take k equals 2.
So in seven dimensions you
take just an L2 function.
If you project it
down to one dimension
in a typical direction, you'll
get something that's C2.
OK.
I'm actually not sure to whom
to attribute this theorem.
I'm in the process of doing
some historical research
and maybe I'll know next class.
All right.
So this theorem is also based
on the Fourier transform
and the way the Fourier
transform interacts
with projections.
So now let's think
about how that works.
Fourier transform
and projections.
All right.
So f is a function on R to the
D. It has a Fourier transform.
We've talked about
it pi v of f is
a function on v. It also
has a Fourier transform.
I just remind you how it works.
So v is a vector space.
It basically works the same
way as on Euclidean space.
OK.
So suppose I have a
function g from V to C.
Then g hat will also be
a function from V to C.
And g hat of ksi will be the
integral over v of g of y, e
to the minus 2 pi iy dot ksi dy.
But dy means with the volume
form for my vector space V.
So that's the Fourier transform.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What do you add
the 2 pi key factor here?
That's normally not include
a general Fourier transform.
Is that just a convention?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, why
is there a 2 pi here?
There are a couple of different
conventions for the Fourier
transform.
One of them has a 2 pi here.
The other one has a 1 over
2 pi to the D in the front.
Those are, as far as I
can tell, equally good.
And they both involve some
slightly annoying factors
of 2 pi.
There's another
convention where you
write neither of those things.
That, strictly speaking, is not
correct, but it's convenient
and it usually is OK.
OK.
Now we can do Fourier inversion
where we recover g of y.
Do Fourier inversion.
That's the integral over V g hat
of ksi to the 2 pi iy dot ksi
d volume V of ksi.
OK.
So that's how the Fourier
transform works on a subspace.
And now, what does projection
do to the Fourier transform?
There is an elegant
formula lemma.
Call it a dictionary lemma.
Translates between
the projection
on the physical side and
projection on the Fourier side.
It's analogous to something that
I called the dictionary lemma
when we were doing large sieve.
All right.
It says the following thing.
If I have a function
on R to the D,
then if I project it to V and
take its Fourier transform,
it's just f hat of
ksi for all ksi in V.
All right.
So let's process a second.
So this is a function on v.
Its Fourier transform is only
defined on V. So this
left-hand side only makes sense
if ksi is in V. But it's
equal to f hat of ksi,
and f hat makes sense for
ksi anywhere in R to the D.
So here's the proof.
Let's just expand out
what everything means.
So the left-hand side is the
integral over V pi vf of y, e
to the minus 2 pi i ksi
dot y d volume v of y.
But what is the projection?
Pi vf of y.
That's also an integral, and
it's an integral over V perp.
So that's the integral over
V, integral over V perp,
f of y plus z, d
volume v perp of z.
So that was this
thing, e to the minus 2
pi iy dot ksi, d volume v of y.
All right.
So now notice that altogether,
if you put this stuff together
and that and that together, we
are integrating over R to the D.
And so more precisely, we can do
of a change of variables here.
We can say x is y plus z
and dx is d volume v of y,
d volume v perp of z.
So this is f of x.
This stuff is just dx.
Now who is this?
Well, because z is in V perp
and ksi is in V, z dot ksi is 0.
So e to the minus 2 pi iy dot
ksi is the same thing as e
to the minus 2 pi
i y plus z dot ksi.
Changed it by z dot
ksi, which was 0, which
is e to the minus 2 pi ix.
So I can rewrite
everything in terms
of x and it's just my integral
f of x, e to the minus 2 pi
x dot ksi dx.
All right.
So that's f hat x ksi, and
that's what we wanted to prove.
All right.
Good.
OK.
So let's see.
How might we use this?
What might this tell us?
So we're interested in
this projection thing.
And the projection
plays very nicely
with the Fourier transform.
And so anything else that
plays nicely with the Fourier
transform, we could
try to figure out how
it interacts with projection.
And one of the fundamental
things that interacts nicely
with the Fourier
transform is the L2 norm,
because we have Plancherel.
So we can write f L2
in terms of f hat.
And f hat is closely
related to pi v of f hat.
Let's just see what happens.
What does that tell us?
So I'll call this
relating f L2 and pi v
of f via the Fourier transform.
And I'm going to focus on
pi theta of f, because that
will make this the easiest.
All right.
So f L2 squared is
f hat L2 squared.
Write that out.
It's the integral over R to the
D f hat of ksi squared d ksi.
OK.
And the different-- if I
take pi theta of f hat,
that will correspond to
f hat on different lines
through the origin.
So that suggests-- let's
separate this out in different
directions by writing
it in polar coordinates.
So this is equal to the integral
over the d minus 1 sphere
integral from 0 to infinity,
f hat of r theta squared
r to the d minus 1, dr d theta.
OK.
And let me do this little trick
to also include negative r,
so that once I fix theta I
have a nice integral from
minus infinity to infinity.
All right.
So this guy is related to
pi theta of f by this lemma.
So this is 1/2 integral
over Sd minus 1 d theta.
So I'm averaging over all
the different directions.
And what am I averaging?
Integrating from minus
infinity to infinity,
pi theta f hat of r theta.
r to the d minus 1 dr.
What is this thing inside here?
At first you might
have thought you
might get the L2 norm of
pi theta of f squared.
So that would be the L2 norm
of pi theta of f squared.
This has this extra
factor here which
heavily weights
large frequencies
and gives a very low weight
to small frequencies.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: That's Sobolev norm.
LAWRENCE GUTH: That's right.
This thing is a Sobolev norm.
So What naturally appears
here is Sobolev norm.
And now let's pause
and we'll review
Sobolev norms and some
important facts about them.
All right.
OK.
So definition.
If I have a function
g on a vector space,
like a subspace of--
a space with the Euclidean norm.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: This is about
the dictionary lemma.
I'm wondering what class of
functions that applies to.
Because if f is an L2 function
so f hat is L2 function,
how is its value on a measure
0 subset being meaningful?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK, great.
So the going back to
the dictionary lemma.
The question was, for
which class of functions
does this actually make sense?
And if you look at what
I wrote on the board,
it's a little suspicious.
It just says that
f is a function.
And if f is just a
function, actually,
none of the sides of this
equation in general makes sense.
One thing that would
be clearly sufficient
is if f was a Schwarz function.
If f is a Schwarz function,
f hat is a Schwarz function,
the projection is
a Schwarz function,
this is a Schwarz function.
So that's all OK.
If f is just L2, it's
not immediately obvious
how all of these things
would be defined.
So let's think about
this way for now.
It's fairly often
the case that we
can prove things about
general L2 functions
by first proving them
for Schwarz functions,
and then proving--
then using the fact that Schwarz
functions are dense in L2.
OK.
Good.
OK, so we were remembering
what is a Sobolev norm.
So if I have a function
on v, then g HS
dot squared is the
integral over v.
I'll take the norm of
g hat of ksi squared.
And then I'll put here
the norm of ksi to the 2S.
This makes sense for
any real number S,
and it has something to do
with the smoothness of g.
And in particular, if
S is a natural number,
then it has an
interpretation in terms
of L2 norms of derivatives.
So g H1 dot squared is the sum
over different directions j
of the j-th derivative of g L2
squared, at least approximately,
maybe exactly, and then
higher values of S--
higher values of S correspond
to taking more derivatives.
So I'll just put
one more and you'll
see the pattern H2 dot squared
is around the sum over j1 and j2
of the second derivative in
the j1 j2 directions of g,
L2 squared, and so on.
OK.
And if S is not an
integer, then there's
not a direct interpretation
of this form,
but it is still
kind of measuring
how smooth the function g is.
There is also a regular.
So this is the Sobolev
norm with a dot.
It's called the
homogeneous Sobolev norm.
There's a version without the
dot, which is defined like this.
g HS squared is the integral
over v g hat of ksi squared 1
plus the norm of ksi
squared to the S d
ksi, which is roughly the same
as if you took out the biggest
power.
So it'd be 1 plus ksi to the
2s, and the one contributes g L2
squared, and the ksi to
the 2S is this thing.
So it contributes
HS dot squared.
OK.
Cool.
So there's a well-known set
of theorems called the Sobolev
embedding theorems, which
imply that if g is in a Sobolev
space for a big enough
S, then it is continuous,
and if even bigger S,
then it's C1, and so on.
So I will write a summary.
Sobolev embedding.
If S is bigger than
1/2 the dimension of V,
then g L infinity is
bounded by g in HS.
And if g is in HS,
then g is continuous.
If S is bigger than some k
plus 1/2 the dimension of V,
then the k-th derivatives of
g are bounded by the HS norm.
And if g is in HS, then its CK.
OK.
Any questions or comments
about Sobolev spaces?
OK.
So now that we have recalled
that, if we look back here,
we will recognize what
appears here as a Sobolev
norm of the projection.
So the L2 norm square root
of f is this integral.
And this thing here is the
HS norm of pi theta of f.
So this is 1/2 integral over the
d minus 1 sphere pi theta of f H
d minus 1 over 2
dot squared d theta.
OK.
Where did this come from,
and why does it have a dot?
This r is the norm
of my frequency ksi.
So this is the norm
of ksi to the 2S.
So S is d minus 1 over 2.
And it's homogeneous.
We don't have this extra one.
So there's a dot.
OK.
Cool.
So now you can probably
have a good guess
of how we would like
to prove this theorem.
The L2 norm controls an integral
like this with the Sobolev norm.
The Sobolev embedding tells
us that the Sobolev norm
controls the CK norm.
So that's the plan.
OK.
But technically, there is
a small technical issue,
which has to do with
the dot or the no dot.
Dot and no dot,
homogeneous, not homogeneous
are both natural and important.
Homogeneous one will occur
naturally in some places.
It naturally occurred here.
On the other hand,
Sobolev embedding
is a theorem that requires the
non-homogeneous Sobolev space.
So we need to do a little
bit of work to get between.
OK.
So now we can do the
proof of theorem.
All right.
So integral SD minus
1 pi theta f CK d
theta is bounded by integral SD
minus 1 pi theta f H d minus 1
over 2 without the
dot squared d theta.
So this is Sobolev embedding.
And the hypothesis
about d up there
is just exactly the
hypothesis that you
need for this to be true when
you plug in Sobolev embedding.
All right.
Now let's open up the
definition of this thing.
And we'll almost see
the f L2 norm squared.
But not quite.
So this is around
integral of SD minus 1,
integral from minus
infinity to infinity, f hat
of r theta squared.
And we'll have 1 plus r to
the d minus 1 dr d theta.
So we don't have a
dot that requires
us to put this extra one
that we didn't have before.
All right.
So you have a sum of two pieces.
In real analysis, we
usually think about which
of the two pieces is bigger.
So if r is bigger than
1, this piece dominates.
And if r is smaller than
1, that piece dominates.
So the integral SD
minus 1 integral r
bigger than 1 f hat of r theta
squared r to the d minus 1 dr
d theta.
That's called that
term number one.
Plus the integral SD minus
1 integral r smaller than 1
f hat of r theta squared
1 times 1 dr d theta.
Let's call this piece two.
OK.
So piece one is clearly smaller
than what we had before,
which was f L2 squared.
So piece is 1 smaller
than f L2 squared.
Piece two.
OK.
In piece two, I think it's
no longer really helpful
to think of this as being
related to polar coordinates.
We're integrating over a
sphere across an interval,
and that's a finite volume.
And so what I'd
like to put here is
just that it's bounded
by a constant, which
is the volume times the
biggest possible size of this.
OK.
So how big is that?
So f hat of ksi is bounded
by the integral f of x,
e to the minus 2
pi i x dot ksi dx.
And the most common approach,
the easiest approach
is to use the
triangle inequality.
So we have this.
So now we have the L1 norm of f.
So we have two pieces.
One piece is controlled
by the L2 norm of f.
The other piece is controlled
by the L1 norm of f.
I could have written
the theorem that way,
but I wrote it a
little bit differently.
I thought it was cuter.
I had the support of
f is in the unit ball.
If the support of f
is in the unit ball,
then we can control the
L1 norm by the L2 norm.
So since the support of
f is in the unit ball,
integral of f of x
dx looks like that.
It's bounded by the integral of
f of x squared to the 1/2 times
the integral over the
unit ball of 1 to the 1/2.
So that's bounded by f L2.
OK.
Using the support, I can bound
both 1 and 2 by f L2 squared.
OK.
That was what I had thought of
as the proof of the theorem.
But now is a good
moment to come back
to the question that
was asked earlier.
What do you actually have to
assume about f for all of this
to make sense?
OK.
So let me add some fine print,
write what we actually proved.
All right.
So the fine print is
for the time being,
suppose that f is
a Schwarz function.
We needed f as a
Schwarz function
to justify our formula
about the Fourier
transform of the projection,
and in a few other places
to make sure all these
Fourier transforms make sense.
If you assume that f is Schwarz,
everything we wrote makes sense
and we get this estimate.
And this is an inequality.
And then it is now possible
to do some extra work.
If you have a function
that's not Schwarz, just
a function in L2, you could have
a sequence of Schwarz functions
that approximate it.
And for each one of those
approximating functions,
this bound would be true.
And then with some
work, you could
show that the bound is also true
for the limiting function f.
OK.
So I'll put a remark.
Can remove the
hypothesis of f Schwarz.
OK.
So any questions or comments
about the proof of this theorem?
AUDIENCE: So it's a condition
that the support of f
is essential to this theorem?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
So the question is, is the
assumption that the support of f
is in the unit ball essential?
What would happen if we
removed this assumption?
Yeah.
So looking at the
proof, we could--
let me get another color.
Looking at the proof,
we could, if we want to,
remove this assumption.
And then we would need to
add the L1 norm, as well
as the L2 norm to deal with.
Due to my brilliant
neighbor labeling scheme,
term one is bounded
by the L2 norm
and term two is
bounded by the L1 norm.
OK.
I haven't thought
about it carefully.
You could ask if we did
this, would it still be true?
I suspect that's not true, and
the natural example to look at
is a function on
a really big ball.
I haven't thought it
through carefully.
It's a good little project
to figure out what happens.
OK.
So the big picture
takeaway of this theorem
is we take a function in
high dimensions, which is not
very regular, and when we
project it to low dimensions,
most of the projections
are much more regular.
And I was trying
to think of places
that this relates to or we
might have seen something
like this before.
And one place where we
see something like this
is the central limit
theorem in probability.
So let me remind
us how that works.
OK.
So suppose that Xj are random
variables which are uniformly
distributed in 0, 1 and there
are a lot of them going up to n.
OK.
So in the central
limit theorem, we
might think what
happens if we add up
all these random variables.
So then we could look
at the sum of the Xj.
This will be a random variable.
Actually, let me put
it-- not that important.
But I'm going to
put minus 1/2, 1/2.
The central limit theorem
is a little bit nicer.
OK.
So what happens
when I add them up?
When I add them up, the
central limit theorem
says that the sum of
these random variables
is approximately a
Gaussian with mean 0
and a standard deviation,
something like square root of n.
And notice in particular
that it's quite smooth.
OK.
So the probability, the joint
probability density function
of these Xj's.
Xj.
Is f of X1 up to XN.
So the characteristic
function of the cube.
So this is a typical--
this is an example of
a function that's in L2
but is not continuous.
OK.
Now what is the probability
density function of this thing?
Well, we have a map.
I guess the summation
map goes from RN to R
and it just takes X1
up to XN and maps it
to X1 plus dot,
dot, dot plus XN.
Add them up.
It's a linear map.
So the probability
density function
of the sum of the Xj's is
the pushforward of f dx.
And this is a slightly
different language,
but up to a small
change of variables,
it's the projection of
f on the main diagonal.
So actually, we can
make this look nicer
if we normalize in the central
limit theorem, which is a fairly
standard way of writing it.
So let me write the central
limit theorem this way.
So now my function is that.
And let's say that theta is
1 over square root of N 1, 1,
which is a unit vector.
So this is just the projection.
I'll call it theta 1 in
the theta 1 direction of f.
So I take the characteristic
function of the cube.
If I project it
in that direction,
I get something that
is almost a Gaussian.
And that's the
central limit theorem.
And notice in particular that
that projection is quite smooth.
So if I were to take
the cube and I were just
going to project it
onto the x1 axis,
well, the other variables
would be irrelevant.
And I would just get the
characteristic function
of an interval.
It would not be any
smoother than it was before.
Still be discontinuous.
And that's the same.
I could project it
onto any of the axes.
They're all the same.
That would be a characteristic
function of an interval.
But if I project it
onto the main diagonal,
then I get the thing in
the central limit theorem,
which is extremely smooth.
And the more I
increase the dimension,
the more it looks
like a Gaussian.
And in particular,
the smoother it gets.
OK.
Now in the central
limit theorem,
it actually is not terribly
important that all of these
are exactly 1.
It's just important that they're
roughly equal to each other.
So as long as you take
a direction, which
doesn't emphasize any of the
coordinate axes too much,
you'll see something like
the central limit theorem.
So in all of those
directions, the projection
will look quite smooth.
And in fact, it will look
a lot like a Gaussian.
But if you were to project
it in the bad directions,
in a coordinate direction
or a combination of a couple
coordinate directions,
then you'll
get something that's
not so smooth.
OK.
So that's an example
of this theorem.
And in this special example, we
can say much more refined things
about which directions
are good and bad
and exactly what happens.
But this theorem is
a lot more general,
because you don't have to put
in the characteristic function
of a cube.
You can put in quite a
broad range of functions,
and qualitatively
similar things happen.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] but
this theorem and the theorem
you did earlier,
it's really the same.
Like when you
integrate, you make
it smoother because the
production is an integration,
kind of.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes.
Yes.
The comment is that
when we project,
we project by integrating
some of the variables.
And so the comment is when
we integrate something
we make it smoother.
That's a really nice comment.
And it reminds us of something
more familiar and fundamental,
which is like if you had a
function of one variable that
was just an L2 site or
L1, if you integrated it,
it would get smoother.
If you integrated it a
whole bunch of times,
then you would get
something smooth.
Yeah.
So this is a little bit like--
this is a little bit like that.
And I guess this smoothness does
come from doing the integration.
In this situation-- yeah?
What's that?
AUDIENCE: The bounds
are interesting still.
Like how smooth it
is is interesting.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes.
The bounds are interesting.
Yes.
Yeah.
And I guess one
of the differences
here is this function
depends on many variables.
We're going to integrate
some of them but not others.
And so-- yeah.
Anyway.
And then it depends which ones
we integrate whether or not
it gets smoother.
But it turns out
that usually it does.
Yeah.
But yeah, I think that is a
good way of looking at it.
Yeah.
Cool.
OK.
So let me end by mentioning.
So as part of the
class, I will try
to mention different ways that
projection theory is related
to various parts of math.
And so this reminds me of
something I heard about,
which is about trying to
generalize the central limit
theorem.
So what if the input was not
independent random variables,
but something
somewhat more general?
Would it still be true that when
we take a projection like this,
you would see a Gaussian?
And so there's a big
body of work on that.
But one interesting
direction I heard about
is initiated by Keith
Ball and its connection
between probability theory
and convex geometry.
And the point of
view is that maybe
to some extent,
what's important about
the cube is just that
it's a convex set.
So instead of the cube, take
any convex set in R to the N
and it's large.
OK.
Now there's no
distinguished-- there's
nothing special about the
coordinate axes anymore.
The coordinate axis projections
aren't necessarily the ones
that are bad, but this one
isn't necessarily good.
But the question
he raised is maybe
you take any convex set
and look at its projections
onto one dimensional spaces.
Maybe most of them
are almost Gaussian.
OK.
And that's a recent
topic of research,
and a significant amount
like that is true.
Keith Ball gave an
ICM talk about it
and I put some references
in the homework
if anybody is interested
in reading about it.
Cool.
OK.
Well, let's stop
there for today.
The plan for Thursday
is to come back
to the large sieve,
which is done,
which is from number theory.
And I'll try to tell you
some things, what kind
of applications in number theory
does the large sieve have.